Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 295 (2016) 70–82

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Computational and Applied
Mathematics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cam

Lattice Boltzmann method for parallel simulations of cardiac
electrophysiology using GPUs
J.O. Campos a , R.S. Oliveira b , R.W. dos Santos a,c , B.M. Rocha a,c,∗
a

Programa de Pós-Graduação em Modelagem Computacional, Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, Brazil

b

Departamento de Ciência da Computação, Universidade Federal de São João del Rei, Brazil

c

Departamento de Ciência da Computação, Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, Brazil

article

info

Article history:
Received 30 September 2014
Received in revised form 31 January 2015
Keywords:
Lattice Boltzmann method
Cardiac electrophysiology
Monodomain
High performance computing

abstract
This work presents the lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) for computational simulations of
the cardiac electrical activity using monodomain model. An optimized implementation of
the lattice Boltzmann method is presented which uses a collision model with multiple relaxation parameters in order to consider the anisotropy of the cardiac tissue. With focus
on fast simulations of cardiac dynamics, due to the high level of parallelism present in the
LBM, a GPU parallelization was performed and its performance was studied under regular
and irregular three-dimensional domains. The results of our optimized lattice Boltzmann
parallel implementation for cardiac simulations have shown acceleration factors as high as
500× for the overall simulation and for the LBM a performance of 419 mega lattice updates
per second was achieved. With near real time simulations in a single computer equipped
with a modern GPU these results show that the proposed framework is a promising approach for application in a clinical workflow.
© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Recently the fields of computational modeling and medical image processing have advanced significantly allowing the
biomedical engineering community to focus on the development of patient-specific models. In the context of cardiac
electrophysiology, such personalized models offer the ability to better understand the heart in pathological conditions,
to develop and improve new therapies and also to optimize complicated procedures. However, before introducing these
computer models for clinicians, efficient numerical and computational techniques for the fast solution of the mathematical
models underlying the complex phenomena of electrical activity of the heart have to be pursued.
There exist an extensive literature about numerical methods for the solution of the reaction–diffusion partial differential
equations (PDEs) that govern cardiac electrophysiology. Among them, the finite element method (FEM) [1] is the most used
method for spatial discretization, although the finite difference and the finite volume methods [2,3] and also alternative
schemes such as spectral methods have been proposed [4].
In the field of computational fluid dynamics (CFD), the lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) [5] has been proposed for
thesimulations of fluid flows as an alternative to these conventional methods such as the FEM. The LBM has been successfully

∗ Correspondence to: Departamento de Ciência da Computação, Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, Rua José Kelmer, s/n, 36036-900, Juiz de Fora/MG,
Brazil. Tel.: +55 32 2102 3481.
E-mail addresses: joventinoo@gmail.com (J.O. Campos), sachetto@ufsj.edu.br (R.S. Oliveira), rodrigo.weber@ufjf.edu.br (R.W. dos Santos),
bernardomartinsrocha@ice.ufjf.br (B.M. Rocha).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cam.2015.02.008
0377-0427/© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

J.O. Campos et al. / Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 295 (2016) 70–82

71

applied to study several fluid flows problems [5,6] as well as in the context of biomedical engineering for simulating arterial
blood flow [7]. The method has also been used to simulate reaction–diffusion equations [8,9], which are similar to the ones
used to describe the electrical activity in cardiac tissue.
Among the computational techniques used for accelerating simulations of cardiac electrophysiology, some studies have
shown that the use of Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) for the numerical simulations is a promising alternative which can
achieve a near real time performance [10–14]. In CFD some works report a real time performance for their simulations using
the LBM on GPUs [15,16].
The objective of this study is to describe the lattice Boltzmann method for the simulations of cardiac electrophysiology
dynamics. The LBM for the reaction–diffusion equations of electrophysiology is first described. Then it is validated and
compared against a traditional FEM solution in a benchmark problem [17]. Considering that the LBM is very suitable to
parallel computing due to its high locality, it turns out that a parallel GPU implementation of the LBM for solving cardiac
electrophysiology models is a promising approach for performing near real time simulations. The GPU parallelization of the
cardiac LBM solver is described and discussed in terms of its performance when applied to some test problems.
2. Cardiac electrophysiology equations
Cardiac tissue is made of interconnected myocytes coupled through a conductive intracellular space, which is
surrounded by a conductive fluid in the extracellular space between the cells. Mathematically this can be modeled as two
interpenetrating spaces (intra- and extracellular spaces) that occupy the same volume and are separated from each other
by the cardiac cell membrane.
The dynamics of cardiac electrophysiology can be described by reaction–diffusion PDEs that consider the kinetics of
a single myocardial cell and ionic current flow between the intra- and extracellular spaces as well as the gap junctions,
which are specialized proteins that form a intercellular connection between neighboring myocytes. The most complete
mathematical model of cardiac electrical activity is the bidomain model that considers the intra- and extracellular spaces
in an averaged sense as conductive regions coupled through the transmembrane current. It can be formally derived by
considering conservation of intra- and extracellular currents, by coupling the two domains with the transmembrane current,
and making use of Ohm’s law and Kirchhoff’s law; see [18] for a detailed derivation.
Since the bidomain model consists of a complex PDE system, that involves computational expensive numerical solution,
it is common to assume that the intra- and extracellular domains have equal anisotropy ratios to obtain a simplified model
called the monodomain model. Following this assumption the monodomain model can be obtained by a reduction from
the bidomain model and is entirely written in terms of the transmembrane potential v = v(x), defined as the difference
between the intra- and extracellular potentials.
The monodomain model is given by


∂v
+ Iion (v, η) = ∇ · (σ∇v),
χ Cm
∂t


(1)

∂η
= f(v, η),
(2)
∂t
where χ is the surface–volume ratio and Cm is the membrane capacitance. The first term on the left-hand side is the rate
of change of the transmembrane potential with time, the second term Iion controls the total ion current, while the term on
the right-hand side describes the diffusion. The reaction term Iion is a function of v and a vector of state variables η and is
coupled to the system of ordinary differential equations (2) that controls the kinetics of the state variables. These variables
represent the dynamics of the ion channels in the cell membrane, as discussed in Cell-level models section. We consider
appropriate initial conditions and apply no-flux boundary conditions, which are given by n · σ∇v = 0, where n is the unit
vector normal to the boundary.
In the monodomain model, σ is the conductivity tensor that describes the electrical properties of the tissue. Anatomic
studies have shown that heart muscle is a strongly anisotropic material due to the fiber structure that comprises the tissue.
Therefore, the electrical propagation is faster in the fiber direction than in the cross-fiber directions. If we consider the
cardiac tissue as a transversely isotropic material, whose preferential direction is given by the fiber direction al , then the
conductivity is given by

σ(x) = σt I + (σl − σt )al (x)aTl (x),

(3)

where I is the identity matrix and σl and σt are the values of the conductivity in the fiber and cross-fiber direction,
respectively.
2.1. Cell-level models
The dynamics of the biophysical processes that underlie the action potential (AP) in a cardiac cell is typically described
by a set of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) that model the total ion current Iion through ion channels (mainly Na+ , K+
and Ca2+ ) in the cell membrane.

72

J.O. Campos et al. / Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 295 (2016) 70–82

a

b

Fig. 1. (a) Action potential of the LRI cell model and (b) some of the ion currents of the model.

In this work three different cell models from distinct species with different levels of complexity were considered to
simulate the kinetics of the reaction term Iion in Eq. (1). The following mathematical models were used: the Luo–Rudy
model I for guinea pig ventricular tissue [19], the ten Tusscher–Panfilov model for human ventricular tissue [20] and the
Mahajan–Shiferaw model [21] for rabbit ventricular tissue. In the following a brief description of each cell model is given.
Luo–Rudy model. The Luo–Rudy model I (LRI) presented in [19], is a mathematical model that describes the electrical activity
in ventricular cells of mammalians. In the LRI model, the total ion current Iion is defined as
Iion (v, η) = INa + Isi + IK + IK1 + IKp + Ib ,

(4)

where INa is the rapid sodium current, Isi is the slow inward current, IK is the time-dependent potassium current, IK1 is
the time-independent potassium current, IKp is the plateau potassium current and Ib is the time-independent background
current.
Four of the six currents present in the model are controlled by the so called gating variables, which are described by ODEs
of the following form:
dn
dt

=

n∞ − n

τn

,

with n∞ =

α
1
and τn =
,
α+β
α+β

(5)

where α and β are functions of v . Fig. 1(a) shows the action potential and (b) shows some of the ion currents present in
Eq. (4) of the LRI cell model. The complete description of this model can be found in [19].
ten Tusscher–Panfilov model. One of the most used mathematical models for computer simulations of human ventricular
cells is the ten Tusscher–Panfilov model (TT2) [20]. This model has 19 state variables which are described by ODEs, and it
also describes the intracellular calcium concentration and conductances of the ionic channels. The total ion current Iion of
this model is given as the sum of the following currents:
Iion = INa + IK1 + Ito + IKr + IKs + ICaL + INaCa + INaK + IpCa + IpK + IbCa + IbNa .

(6)

A complete description of the currents that form the total ion current, the equations of the model and its parameters can be
found in the original publication [20].
Mahajan–Shiferaw model. The Mahajan–Shiferaw model (MSH) is a modification of a previous rabbit ventricular model to
reproduce action potentials at rapid rates relevant to the study of ventricular arrhythmias. The model consists of 26 nonlinear
ODEs, including voltage, gating variables, Markov states for the L-type calcium current, troponin buffers, average calcium
concentration and others. For a complete description of the model see [21].
3. Lattice Boltzmann method
In order to solve the reaction–diffusion model (1), that describes the electrical activity in cardiac tissue we will use the
lattice Boltzmann method (LBM). We will describe the LBM adapted for the numerical simulation of reaction–diffusion
equations as discussed in [8,9], but here we focus on cardiac electrophysiology equations.
For simulations using the LBM, the domain is discretized by an equally spaced Cartesian grid. Every node of the grid
has N velocity directions ei (i = 0, . . . , N − 1) and N particle distribution functions fi which describe the probability of a
certain number of particles moving in the velocity direction ei . In the LBM framework, the distribution function of the scalar
quantity v at time t, position x with velocity in the direction ei is denoted by fi (x, t ). Here v is the transmembrane potential.
The lattice Boltzmann equation that describes the evolution of the particle distribution functions fi (x, t ) may be written
as:
fi (x + ei 1x, t + 1t ) − fi (x, t ) = Ω (x, t ),

(7)

J.O. Campos et al. / Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 295 (2016) 70–82

73

where Ω (x, t ) is the collision operator for v and depends on distribution functions fi (x, t ), and 1t and 1x are the time step
and grid interval, respectively. The left-hand side represents free transport of the particles (streaming), while the right-hand
side describes interactions of the particles through collisions. Although the LBM kinetic equation can be combined into a
single statement as in Eq. (7), collision and streaming steps are usually considered separated, since the collision step is purely
local and the streaming step involves the traveling of the particles to neighboring nodes along velocity directions.
For reaction–diffusion problems, as is the case of the monodomain equation, the collision term may be written as the
sum of a reactive term Ω R and a non-reactive term denoted by Ω NR , as described in [8]. The non-reactive part of the collision
operator is described by the traditional Bhatnagar–Gross–Krook (BGK) approximation [22], which models the collisions as
a single-time relaxation towards a local equilibrium. In this case the non-reactive collision operator is given by
1

eq

Ω NR (x, t ) = − (fi (x, t ) − fi (x, t )),
τ

(8)

eq

where τ is the relaxation parameter and fi is the equilibrium distribution function that depends on the variable v and
velocity u. In general, when the LBM is applied for the numerical simulation of fluids through the Navier–Stokes (NS)
eq
equations, the equilibrium distribution function fi is given by
eq

fi (x, t ) = wi v


1+

(ei · u)
cs2

+

(ei · u)2
2cs4

−

u
2cs2



,

(9)

where cs is the velocity of sound on the lattice and the wi are coefficients that depend on the type of lattice in use. However,
since we are interested in modeling a pure reaction–diffusion problem, we will consider that the velocity is zero, i.e., u = 0.
In this case, the equilibrium distribution function reduces to the following form
eq

fi (x, t ) = wi v.

(10)

For the reactive part of the collision operator, it is assumed [8] that R represents the change in v due to the reaction, which
enables the reactive part to be distributed among the different directions proportionally to wi , that is

Ω R (x, t ) = wi R.

(11)

We recover the macroscopic quantities by taking the moments of the distribution functions fi . Thus, the macroscopic
 N −1
variable v , which is the solution of Eq. (1), can be recovered as the sum of the distributions fi as v(x, t ) =
i=0 fi (x, t ),
where N is the number of lattice directions and depends on the lattice model used. The lattice model used in this work will
be described next.
3.1. LBM for the monodomain model
The reaction term R that appears in the reactive collision operator Ω R is determined by the cell model used to describe
the kinetics of the cellular membrane. In general, these models are described by a system of non-linear ODEs. An example
of system of ODEs for these state variables is given by Eq. (5) of the Luo–Rudy model I. In particular, for the Luo–Rudy model
the reactive term is R = Iion + Istim where for the LRI model Iion is given by (4) and for the TT2 model it is given by Eq. (6).
In this work the D3Q7 lattice model was used to solve three dimensional reaction–diffusion problems. The notation
DnQm represents a lattice Boltzmann model in n dimensions with m discrete velocity directions. In our case we consider 7
velocity directions for the distribution functions, that is, the particles can stream to six directions (shown in red and blue in
Fig. 2), or remain at rest. The coefficients wi for the D3Q7 model associated with the distribution function in direction ei are
given by

w0 =

1
4

,

w1−6 =

1
8

,

(12)

and the corresponding velocity directions are shown in Fig. 2. For two dimensional diffusion problems the D2Q5 model can
be used; more details can be found in [23].
In our implementation we proceed as follows: first, given v n and ηn the current approximations to v and η at time t = tn ,
we solve the system of ODEs given by
Cm
dη
dt

dv
dt

= −Iion (v, η) + Istim ,

= f(v, η),

v(tn ) = v n ,
(13)

η(tn ) = η ,
n

and then, we use the intermediate solution of (13), denoted by v ∗ , and the R = Iion (v n , ηn ) + Istim term to compute the
eq
equilibrium distribution functions fi of the LBM during the collision step. After the collision, we apply the streaming and
boundary conditions steps of LBM to obtain the approximate solution v n+1 at t = tn + 1t. Note that here Istim denotes an
external stimulus that is usually applied in order to initiate electrical activity of cardiac myocytes.

74

J.O. Campos et al. / Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 295 (2016) 70–82

Fig. 2. The D3Q7 lattice model used to solve reaction–diffusion problems in three dimensions with seven velocity directions. That is, each node can
deliver particle distributions to each of the six neighboring nodes or remain at rest. Blue and red labels were used to emphasize opposing directions that
are exploited by the optimized streaming algorithm used in this work. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)

3.2. LBM for anisotropic reaction–diffusion equation
Most of the lattice Boltzmann models used for diffusion phenomena are limited to isotropic diffusion. This is because
the LBM with the traditional BGK collision operator, does not have sufficient parameters to describe anisotropic diffusion.
In fact, since it is based on only one relaxation time parameter τ , as shown in Eq. (8), this model is usually referred to as
single-relaxation-time (SRT).
In order to overcome this limitation, some studies [24,25,23] have proposed different methods for incorporating
anisotropic diffusion into the LBM. To account for the anisotropic nature of cardiac tissue we used the multiple-relaxationtime (MRT) collision operator, as it was proposed in [23] for a convective and anisotropic diffusion equation.
First, before we introduce the MRT model, note that if we denote by f and feq the column vectors formed by the distrieq
bution functions fi and equilibrium distribution functions fi , then the SRT model can be written in terms of the following
collision operator

Ω NR = −A(f − feq ),

(14)

where the collision matrix A is defined in terms of τ as A = (1/τ )I.
The MRT model projects the vector f in a vector space where each component corresponds to a certain moment of f.
Then, the collision operator is applied in the moment space in order to relax each component towards the equilibrium with
a different relaxation coefficient. Finally, the vector is projected back onto the original space. The MRT allows to tune the
relaxation coefficient for each moment separately, which makes possible to consider anisotropic diffusion.
Following [23], the MRT model is then given by

Ω NR = −M−1 SM(f − feq ),

(15)

where M is the matrix that projects a vector onto the moment space. The definition of the matrix M depends on the choice
of the moments. Here we consider the first moment as the conserved quantity, that is, the transmembrane potential v . The
second to fourth moments are related to the flux of v in the i direction, and the remaining moments are obtained using
Gram–Schmidt’s procedure. The matrix M and the relaxation-time matrix S are defined, respectively, by

1
0
0

M=
0
6


0
0

1
1
0
0
−1
2
0

1
−1
0
0
−1
2
0

1
0
1
0
−1
−1
1

1
0
−1
0
−1
−1
1

1
0
0
1
−1
−1
−1

1
0 
0 

−1
,
−1

−1
−1



τ

0

0
0

S −1 = 
0
0

0
0

0

0

0

τ̄xx
τ̄yx
τ̄zx

τ̄xy
τ̄yy
τ̄zy

τ̄xz
τ̄yz
τ̄zz

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0
0

τ4
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

τ5
0

0
0
0

0
.
0

0



τ6

Here τ0 , τ4 , τ5 , τ6 and τ̄ij are the relaxation-time coefficients. It is shown in [23] that the relationship between the relaxation
coefficients and the conductivity tensor components σij is given by

1t
1
(16)
δij + 4 2 σij .
2
1x
The coefficient τ0 is related to the potential and τ4 , τ5 and τ6 , which are related to the higher order moments, do not directly
affect the diffusion, only the stability of the method [23].

τ̄ij =

3.3. Boundary conditions
The no-flux boundary conditions for the transmembrane potential v is a homogeneous Neumann boundary condition.
This kind of boundary condition can be easily implemented in the lattice Boltzmann method by imposing that the incoming

J.O. Campos et al. / Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 295 (2016) 70–82

75

distribution at the boundary node is equal to the outgoing one. In the context of fluid flow LBM simulations, this is known
as the bounce-back rule [5].
To describe this rule, consider a 2D domain and the D2Q5 lattice model. Suppose we are at node located at x = (0, y)
where the incoming distribution function f1 is unknown. The Neumann-type boundary condition at this face can be imposed
simply by taking f1 (x, t + 1t ) = f2 (x, t ). In general, we can express this boundary treatment as
fa (x, t + 1t ) = fb∗ (x, t ),

(17)

∗

where fb is the post-collision distribution function and the b index indicates the opposite direction to a, that is, ea = −eb .
3.4. Implementation
We now describe some details of the numerical implementation of the LBM solver for the cardiac monodomain equation.
Initially, we present a general overview of the solution algorithm. Then, we describe the details of the two most important
parts of the solver: the method used for the numerical solution of the nonlinear system of ODEs and the optimized LBM
solver used for evolution of the diffusion part of the monodomain equation.
3.4.1. Solution algorithm
An overview of the complete solution strategy is presented in Algorithm 1. The first steps (lines 1 and 2) set up the
initial conditions of the ODEs for each node of the grid and allocate memory for the LBM solver. The initial setup of the LBM
eq
initializes the distribution functions fi to the equilibrium distribution function fi , which are computed with the initial value
of the transmembrane potential v = v0 .
Algorithm 1: Solution of the monodomain problem by the lattice Boltzmann method.

1. InitializationODEs();
2. InitializationLBM ();

3. for k ← 1 to Nsteps do

t ← t + ∆t;
for j ← 1 to Nnodes do
6.
Advance ODEs of node j using the RL method;
7.
for i ← 0 to N − 1 do
8.
CollisionAndStreamingSwap();
9.
fi∗ (x, t ) = fi (x, t ) + Ω (x, t );
10.
fi (x + ei ∆x, t + ∆t ) = fi∗ (x, t );
11.
end
12.
end
13.
ApplyBoundaryConditions();
14.
OutputData();
15. end
4.

5.

During the time integration loop (lines 3–15), for each node of the computational grid, we first advance the ODEs
in time using the Rush–Larsen method (line 6) and then with the updated values of the reaction term Iion and v , for
each of the N velocity directions (lines 7–11), we apply the collision and streaming steps of the lattice Boltzmann
method. The collision and streaming steps, described by the formulas in lines 9 and 10, respectively, are fused in the
CollisionAndStreamingSwap() routine in order to reduce memory transactions. Thus, the solver traverses the grid
only once at each time step and first, using the updated values of v and Iion , the collision operator is applied to obtain the
intermediate values for distribution functions fi∗ . Then, the streaming of the particles to the neighboring nodes, as defined by
the lattice model defined in Fig. 2, is performed. After that, we apply the boundary conditions to the nodes on the boundary
and, if required, data is written to file.
3.4.2. ODEs solver
The numerical solution of the system of ODEs from Eq. (13) at each node of the grid was performed using the Rush–Larsen
(RL) method [26]. The RL method is an explicit method that takes advantage of ODEs of the form shown in Eq. (5) for the
numerical integration. The RL method is easy to implement and has better stability properties than the explicit Euler method.
Thus, it allows the use of larger time steps resulting in an efficient method for the numerical solution of cell models of cardiac
electrophysiology.
3.4.3. Optimizations of the LBM solver
Here we describe some strategies that optimize the LBM solver used for the diffusion part of the monodomain equation.
These optimizations were used for both the CPU and GPU implementations.

76

J.O. Campos et al. / Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 295 (2016) 70–82

To achieve an optimized GPU implementation for fast simulations, the memory layout of the particle distribution
functions fi has to be considered carefully. For optimized GPU memory transactions, we store the particle distribution
functions fi in memory using a one dimensional array, such that fi is addressed as f[i*Nx*Ny*Nz+z*Ny*Nx+y*Nx+x],
where Nx, Ny, Nz and x, y, z are the number of nodes and their indices in the x, y and z directions, respectively. Thus, the
ordering of the data in f follows the Structure of Arrays (SoA) format.
Traditional implementations of the LBM often use an additional temporary array for storing the particle distribution
functions fi since during the streaming step data is shifted in space. Otherwise, if no temporary memory is used, some data
would be overwritten during the streaming step. One approach to overcome this extra memory usage is to use the swap
algorithm [27,28] for the streaming step, which never copies data to a temporary array, but always swaps it with another
variable. This requires that the indexes of the particle distribution functions are reorganized (see Fig. 2) in such a way that
the rest-particle function has index 0, and that the opposite of an index from the lower half is found by adding (N − 1)/2 to
it: opposite(i) = i + (N − 1)/2 for i = 1 . . . (N − 1)/2. The algorithm requires a strict processing order of the lattice nodes
and proceeds by continuously swapping half of a particle distribution function of a node with the ones from its neighbors.
With this approach we are able to perform the collision and streaming steps together so that grid traversal is performed
only once.
To efficiently represent irregular geometries, like the ones shown in Fig. 3, a sparse data structure [29] (or indirect
addressing scheme) was used in our implementation instead of the traditional full matrix representation (or direct addressing
scheme). This scheme requires an adjacency array of Nnodes × N − 1 integers to store the information about the neighbors
of each node along each of the directions ei . Since there is no streaming in the e0 direction, there is no neighbor to store in
the adjacency array. In the full matrix scheme, for a node labeled as k with grid indexes given by ix, iy and iz, we access
a neighbor in the x direction by simply specifying ix-1. With the indirect addressing scheme, first we need to consult the
adjacency array adj[k][0] to find out the index of the neighboring node and then proceed with the computation (in this
example we considered that the previous neighbor in the x direction has column index 0).
At first glance it may seem that the sparse data structure approach requires more memory, since it needs to store an
additional array of integers. However, for the geometries used here (see Fig. 3) the sparse data structure scheme uses only
36% of the memory required by the full matrix scheme.
4. Parallel implementation
After the CPU version of the code was implemented, and validated using a benchmark problem that will be described
in the numerical experiments, we parallelized it using CUDA. The present GPU LBM solver was parallelized such that one
thread performs the complete LBM algorithm at one spatial location x in the computational domain. Since we store f in order
of lattice direction i and then by spatial coordinates, we ensure a contiguous memory access pattern, which is important for
a GPU implementation to achieve good performance.
The CUDA environment allows to define C functions, named CUDA kernels, that will be executed in the device (GPU) when
they are called by the CPU code at the host. For executing CUDA kernels, it is necessary to define the execution configuration
that describes how the threads are organized. The threads are organized in blocks, each block is executed by some GPU
multiprocessor and this configuration may impact the performance of the code. Specific CUDA kernels were developed to
solve each part of the problem, such as the solution of the ODEs and the collision and streaming steps of the LBM solver.
In this work all CUDA kernels were launched with a fixed number of threads per block ntb and due to the data layout used
to store the distribution functions only one-dimensional blocks were used. To assess the performance of the GPU code we
used a different number of threads per block: ntb ∈ {64, 128, 256, 512}.
During the parallel simulations, all computations were performed on the GPU without any data transfer to CPU, which
are very costly and may degrade performance. A temporary array was created to store the macroscopic variable v at some
time instants and then at the end of the simulation one data transfer was performed from the GPU to the CPU to write the
results to a file.
To assess the performance of the implementations of this work we used two metrics: speedup and MLUPS (Mega Lattice
Updates Per Second). The parallel speedup shows by how much the optimized parallel GPU implementation was faster in
terms of execution time when compared to the CPU implementation. Therefore, speedup was computed as S = TGPU /TCPU ,
where TGPU and TCPU are the execution times of the GPU and CPU implementations. MLUPS accounts for the time to calculate
one time step for a given grid and is a handy unit for measuring performance of LBM codes. MLUPS was calculated as
MLUPS = (Nnodes × Nsteps )/Tp , where Tp is the time spent to solve the parabolic PDE.
5. Numerical experiments
In this section we present the numerical experiments carried out in this work and the computing environment used to
perform them. We also report the results of the experiments and compare the performance of the GPU implementation with
the single core CPU implementation.
5.1. Computing environment
The numerical experiments were carried out a Linux 2.6.32 machine, with 12 GB of memory, Intel Xeon E5620 2.40 GHz
processor with 4 cores and 12 MB of cache memory, which will be simply referred here as CPU code. The LBM solver

J.O. Campos et al. / Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 295 (2016) 70–82

a

77

b

Fig. 3. Realistic geometries used in the simulations. (a) Rabbit bi-ventricular geometry and (b) fiber orientation. The vectors that define the fiber orientation
were colored according to its long axis component. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version
of this article.)

was implemented in C++ and compiled with GNU GCC version 4.4.7 with the following optimization flags enabled: -O3
-ffast-math. Our GPU testbed is a NVIDIA Tesla M2050 processor, comprising 448 CUDA cores organized as 14 streaming
multiprocessors. This GPU has a total of 3 GB of memory and a memory bandwidth of 148 GB/s. The CUDA code was compiled
with NVIDIA nvcc compiler version 6.0.1 with the same optimization flags of the CPU code. The simulations were carried out
using both single (SP) and double (DP) precision floating point arithmetic and the GPU comparisons against the CPU were
always made using the same floating point representation.
5.2. Test problems
Three different test problems to evaluate the LBM code for the simulation of the electrical activity of cardiac tissue were
considered. Some of these problems use simplified geometries, whereas the others use realistic geometries of the heart.
Here we describe these problems briefly.
Benchmark problem. A benchmark problem was proposed in [17] for the validation of implementations of the monodomain
model. The domain consists of a rectangular region of size 2 × 0.7 × 0.3 cm3 and the fibers are defined to be parallel to the
longitudinal direction and the conductivity tensor is considered transversely isotropic as defined by Eq. (3). The conductivity
in the fiber direction is 1.334 mS/cm, whereas the conductivity in the cross-fiber direction is 0.176 mS/cm. Other parameters
are defined as: χ = 1400 cm−1 and Cm = 1 µF/cm2 . The 2006 version of the ten Tusscher cell model [20] is used in this
test case. An external stimulus of −50 000 µA/cm3 is applied during 2 ms in a small cubic region of 0.15 cm3 at one corner
of the tissue to trigger the electrical activity.
Cubic region. A slightly modified version of the benchmark problem is used, wherein the domain consists of a cube of
dimensions 1.28 × 1.28 × 1.28 cm3 . The parameters, conductivity and stimulation protocol are the same used for the
benchmark problem. The performance was evaluated using an increasing number of nodes for the three directions of the
cube. Two different cell models having different levels of complexity, the LRI and TT2 models, were used to simulate 1 s of
the electrical activity using a time step of 1t = 0.1 ms.
Rabbit bi-ventricular geometry. A realistic mesh of both left and right ventricles of the rabbit including fiber orientation
was used for anisotropic simulations of the electrical activity. This rabbit geometry was obtained by a procedure where
the rabbit heart was mechanically fixed, the ventricles were filled with silicone and then appropriately sliced for imaging.
Segmentation was applied to each image in order to determine the inside and outside of the tissue. Tissue blocks were
extracted from these slices, and fiber orientation was determined. Then, data were fitted to a finite element description in
prolate spheroidal co-ordinates. More details can be found in [30]. The version of this mesh used in the present work consists
of a regular hexahedral grid suitable for our lattice Boltzmann simulations.
Two grids were used in the simulations, a coarse one which comprises 522 841 nodes with a spacing of 1x = 250 µm
and a refined version with 3 760 560 nodes and 1x = 125 µm. The refined grid was obtained by simply halving 1x in each
direction. The MSH cell model was used for these simulations using the RL method with a time step of 1t = 0.1 ms. A
transversely isotropic conductivity tensor was used with σl = 1.334 mS/cm and σt = 0.176 mS/cm. The geometry and
orientation of the fibers are shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b).
5.3. Validation using the benchmark problem for electrophysiology
The benchmark problem was solved using the lattice Boltzmann method with different time steps (1t = 0.05, 0.01 and
0.005 ms) and space steps (1x = 500, 200 and 100 µm). In order to measure the accuracy of the code we considered the
activation time of a node, which was defined as the time at which the transmembrane potential v reaches the value of 0 mV.
The same metric, taken from control points along the diagonal line of the domain, was used in [17] to compare the results of
several codes. The propagation of the wave that electrically activates the slab of cardiac tissue of the benchmark problem,
from the application of the electrical stimulus until its complete activation, is shown in Fig. 4(a) to (d).

78

J.O. Campos et al. / Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 295 (2016) 70–82

a

b

c

d

Fig. 4. Propagation of the electrical wave of excitation through the domain defined by the benchmark problem at different time steps.

Fig. 5. Activation times (the time instant that the potential v passes through 0 mV upon first activation) of the CARP and Chaste codes, as reported in [17],
and the activation times obtained with the present implementation using the LBM. The figures present the results of the simulations with a fixed time step
1t = 0.005 ms and with different spacings 1x = {500, 200, 100} µm.

We present in Fig. 5 the activation times of two codes, CARP [31] and Chaste [32], which were reported in [17] and represent the different behaviors obtained by the codes tested in the benchmark experiment. The results of the LBM for the
benchmark problem are also shown in Fig. 5 for the smallest time step 1t = 0.005 ms. The activation times resulting from
the LBM simulation also converge to the same value obtained by the other codes, which is around 41 ms. We also note that
the behavior of the LBM is very similar to the one presented by the Chaste code. Thus we conclude that the LBM can be used
to perform simulations of the electrical activity of cardiac tissue.
Next, we carried out a convergence study with respect to the time step 1t used for the simulations, keeping the spacing 1x constant. To verify the convergence with respect to time step, we performed simulations with the following time
steps 1t = {0.1, 0.05, 0.025, 0.0125, 0.00625} ms. Although spacing was fixed for each test, we carried out simulation
with different spacings 1x = {500, 200, 100} µm (the same values used in the benchmark study [17]). As in the previous
experiment, the activation time of the corner node was used as reference.
Fig. 6 shows the results of this experiment. In general, for large time steps the conduction velocity of the electrical wave
that spreads over the cardiac tissue is slower and thus, the activation time at the reference node is larger. However, the figure
clearly shows that as we reduce 1t, the value of the activation time at the reference node converges. With smaller spacings
1x of 200 µm and 100 µm the converged value of the activation time at the reference node is very close (about 40 ms).
The converged value at the reference node for the 1x = 500 µm case is different, mainly due to the coarse discretization
employed.
5.4. Electrical activity in a regular domain
The performance results of the parallel LBM solver for the cubic region of cardiac tissue are reported in Fig. 7 in terms of
the speedups obtained. The reported speedup considers the time to solve the entire problem, that is, it includes the solution of ODEs and of the parabolic PDE for all time steps. The GPU results reported in this test were obtained using different
execution configurations for the kernels, in particular, we used 64, 128, 256 and 512 threads per block. It is important to
note that, for some execution configurations, such as the ntb = 64 case, since the maximum number of blocks per grid is
65 535, it was not possible to perform the simulations with domain sizes larger than 1283 . For the ntb = 128 case, it was not
possible to launch the kernels when the domain size was larger than 1923 nodes.
Fig. 7 shows that, as the problem size increased, better speedups were observed. This is because as we increase the number of lattice nodes, we were able to better take advantage of the massive parallelism provided by the GPU. The speedups
obtained for the LRI model were greater than for the TT2 model, since the latter has a more complex ODE system and therefore involves more floating point operations as well as memory transactions. In single precision, speedup factors of about
500 were obtained for some cases using the LRI model, whereas factors of about 400 were achieved for the TT2 model. In
double precision, we observed good performances as well, but the speedups were halved, as expected. The best performance
was achieved with 128 threads per block and large domains for both LRI and TT2 models.

J.O. Campos et al. / Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 295 (2016) 70–82

79

Fig. 6. Activation times obtained with the present implementation using the LBM varying the time step 1t for a fixed spacing 1x. The plots show the
convergence with respect to time step.

(a) LRI.

(b) TT2.

Fig. 7. Performance of the code with respect to speedup for the D3Q7 lattice with different discretizations (number of lattice nodes per direction) of the
cubic domain. The simulations were performed using both single (SP) and double precision (DP) floating point arithmetic and with a different number of
threads per block.
Table 1
Total elapsed time (in s) and speedup obtained for the LRI and TT2 cell models.
Cell model

Nnodes

CPU

GPU

Speedup

LRI

323
643
1283
1923
2243

689
5 550
44 400
149 000
237 000

3
13
97
305
519

230
427
458
488
457

TT2

323
643
1283
1923
2243

1 420
13 500
109 000
405 000
589 000

6
37
287
966
1520

237
365
380
419
387

In Table 1 we report the execution times of the CPU and GPU and the respective speedup for the simulations using
ntb = 256 using single precision, which achieved the best performance. First note that the execution times of the GPU for
small grid sizes were close to a real-time performance, taking 6 s and 37 s of execution time to simulate 1 s of electrical
activity for the 323 and 643 case, respectively, with the more complex TT2 cell model. Different speedups were obtained for
the two cell models, with higher accelerations for the LRI model (8 ODEs) and slightly smaller speedups for the TT2 model
(19 ODEs). For the 1923 grid, a 488-fold speedup factor and a near real-time performance were achieved using the LRI
model.

80

J.O. Campos et al. / Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 295 (2016) 70–82

(a) Full conductivity tensor.

(b) Diagonal conductivity tensor.

Fig. 8. Performance of the code for the D3Q7 lattice with different discretizations of the cubic domain.

Fig. 9. Simulations of electrical activity in the rabbit ventricles.

In this test case since the fiber is aligned with the x-axis, the resulting conductivity tensor is diagonal. We note that the
implementation of the non-reaction term of the collision given in Eq. (15) does not perform matrix–matrix multiplication,
rather it is hand-coded in order to optimize numerical computations. Here, since the conductivity tensor is diagonal, we
considered two implementations for the LBM solver: one that exploits this fact in the code and another, more general, that
takes the full conductivity tensor, without exploiting its diagonal structure for this test case.
We present the performance results of the LBM solver in terms of MLUPS using the GPU for the general and diagonal
implementations in Fig. 8(a) and (b), respectively. The simulations were performed using both single and double precision
floating point arithmetic and with a different number of threads per block. Since the LBM is only used to solve the parabolic
PDE, the results for both cell models LRI and TT2 are very similar. The differences in the ODEs do not affect the LBM and thus
we only report the results for the TT2.
First, it is clear that the diagonal implementation had an overall better performance than the general implementation,
since its computations are simplified due to the diagonal structure of the conductivity tensor and thus it performs less
floating point operations. The general implementation obtained good performances of about 320 MLUPS with 128 and 256
threads per block in the finer grids of 2243 nodes. The best performance achieved by the diagonal implementation on the
1923 grid was about 400 MLUPS using 256 threads per block in single precision.
Although the diagonal implementation obtained a better performance, we note that it is not the general case and when
complex geometries with physiological fiber orientations, such as the one from Fig. 3, are used, the general implementation
has to be used. We only report on its performance here to show the impact of considering the anisotropy of cardiac tissue
in the MRT collision operator of LBM solver.

5.5. Rabbit biventricular geometry
Fig. 9 presents snapshots of the simulation of the electrical activity in the rabbit bi-ventricular geometry at different time
steps. In this case we apply an external stimulus at the apex to initiate the electrical activity which was simulated for 1 s.
The results for the rabbit bi-ventricular geometry are shown in Table 2, where the total elapsed time, speedup and MLUPS
obtained for the LBM solver to complete 1 s of simulation using the MSH cell model are detailed.

J.O. Campos et al. / Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 295 (2016) 70–82

81

Table 2
Execution time in seconds and speedup obtained for the rabbit geometry.

1x (µm)

TCPU

TGPU

Speedup

MLUPSGPU

250
125

24 500
217 000

85
635

287
341

265
281

For the finest grid, a 341-fold speedup was achieved by the GPU code in comparison to the single core CPU version for
the entire problem. This clearly shows a good performance improvement when compared to the CPU implementation. In
this test case 281 MLUPS were obtained with the LBM solver for the solution of the parabolic PDE.
6. Conclusions
In this work we have demonstrated the usage of the lattice Boltzmann method for the numerical solution of cardiac
electrophysiology equations in 3D domains with regular and complex geometries. Here we discussed an optimized
implementation of the lattice Boltzmann method with improvements in the streaming step using the swap algorithm, which
has less memory requirements and allows to step through memory only once. Also a sparse representation of the LBM grid
was introduced in order to reduce memory usage.
One of the main attractive features of the LBM is the high locality of its operations, therefore making it well suited for
parallel implementation using modern GPUs. We have described a parallel implementation of the monodomain equation
with the LBM using the CUDA environment. Then, the performance gains obtained with such approach was shown through
several numerical experiments. Acceleration factors as high as 500× and 419 MLUPS were obtained and a near real time
performance was achieved in a single computer equipped with a modern GPU, which makes this approach very suitable for
application in a clinical workflow. The simulations were performed using both single and double precision floating point
arithmetic and with a different number of threads per block.
6.1. Related works
Here we discuss some related works with focus on performance of cardiac electrophysiology simulations using
accelerators and also the lattice Boltzmann method within this context.
Bartocci et al. presented in [12] two-dimensional simulations of cardiac dynamics using the monodomain model
implemented with CUDA. Five different cell models, with increasing complexity were used, for the simulations in grids
with variable sizes to assess their implementation. The results showed a near real-time performance. In this work we also
present simulations with near real-time performance, however we present a different method for the numerical solution
of the monodomain model and we focus on 3D simulations with regular and irregular geometries. To make a comparison
with their results on a 2D grid of 15362 nodes, we consider the same cell model (TT2) and the same simulation time of 1 s.
We note that the GPU we used is similar to the one used in their experiments, which was a NVIDIA Tesla C2070. In this case,
their best implementation, which takes advantage of their 2D grid using texture memory and also other optimizations for
the cell model, took about 300 s to simulate 1 s of cardiac dynamics in single precision. Our experiment with a regular cubic
domain with 1283 nodes, slightly less than their grid, took 287 s to complete and a speedup of 380× was obtained. It should
be noted, that our implementation is generic since it uses a data structure with indirect addressing that supports complex
3D domains. We remark also that their implementation took advantage of some CUDA features optimized for spatial locality
in 2D simulations.
Recently, Wang et al. have presented in [14] the performance results of an implementation of the monodomain equation
on modern accelerators using different implementations with OpenMP, CUDA, OpenCL and also an implementation using
the OpenACC auto-parallelization API. In this work the performance results were presented in terms of speedup and only
for 2D simulations. The cell model used in [14] was a 8 variables model, which in terms of complexity is comparable to
the LRI used in this work. In their best scenario in a grid with 20482 nodes using double precision, an acceleration factor of
200× was obtained with respect to a single core CPU implementation and 30× with respect to their OpenMP parallel code.
In terms of speedup only, our best case using double precision was 300× faster than our single core CPU code. Note that,
their best results were obtained with a GPU card Tesla K20, whose peak performance is much higher than the GPU we used
in our experiments.
In terms of related works using the lattice Boltzmann method for simulating cardiac electrophysiology using the
monodomain model, to the best of our knowledge, Rapaka et al. in [33] was the only work to report its usage in a single
core CPU implementation. We used the same D3Q7 lattice model with the MRT for the collision operator as used in their
work. Here, however, we described an optimized implementation of the LBM using the swap algorithm and a sparse
representation for the computational grid. We also provided a detailed description of a parallel LBM GPU implementation
and its performance for a reaction–diffusion problem with the objective to explore the high locality of its operation to obtain
fast and near real-time simulations, which was demonstrated through our results.
It is also important to relate the present work with other works of our group [3,13] with focus on fast simulations of
cardiac electrophysiology. In [13] 2D simulations of cardiac activity were carried out on the GPU with CUDA using the finite

82

J.O. Campos et al. / Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 295 (2016) 70–82

element method for spatial discretization and the Crank–Nicolson implicit time scheme. Thus, a system of linear equations
had to be solved at each time step of the solution algorithm, in contrast to the explicit nature of the LBM used in the present
work. In [3] an adaptive mesh algorithm with the finite volume method was proposed for fast numerical solution of the
monodomain equation using a parallel implementation with OpenMP. Due to the data structure used for adaptive mesh
refinement an efficient GPU implementation still remains a challenge, however, we note that other strategies like the one
proposed in [6] for mesh refinement with the LBM could be combined with this work for GPU simulations.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially funded by FAPEMIG, CAPES, UFJF and CNPq.
References
[1] B.M. Rocha, F. Kickinger, A.J. Prassl, G. Haase, E.J. Vigmond, R.W. dos Santos, S. Zaglmayr, G. Plank, A macro finite-element formulation for cardiac
electrophysiology simulations using hybrid unstructured grids, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 58 (2011) 1055–1065.
[2] R.H. Clayton, A.V. Panfilov, A guide to modelling cardiac electrical activity in anatomically detailed ventricles, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 96 (2008) 19–43.
[3] R.S. Oliveira, B.M. Rocha, D. Burgarelli, W. Meira, R. Weber do Santos, A parallel accelerated adaptive mesh algorithm for the solution of electrical
models of the heart, Int. J. High Perform. Syst. Archit. 4 (2) (2012).
[4] R. Bordas, B. Carpentieri, G. Fotia, F. Maggio, R. Nobes, J. Pitt-Francis, J. Southern, Simulation of cardiac electrophysiology on next-generation highperformance computers, Philos. Trans. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 367 (2009) 1951–1969.
[5] S. Succi, The Lattice Boltzmann Equation: for Fluid Dynamics and Beyond, Oxford Science Publications, 2013.
[6] P. Neumann, T. Neckel, A dynamic mesh refinement technique for lattice Boltzmann simulations on octree-like grids, Comput. Mech. 51 (2013)
237–253.
[7] A.M. Artoli, A.G. Hoekstra, P.M.A. Sloot, Mesoscopic simulations of systolic flow in the human abdominal aorta, J. Biomech. 39 (2006) 873–884.
[8] S.P. Dawson, S. Chen, G.D. Doolen, Lattice Boltzmann computations for reaction–diffusion equations, J. Chem. Phys. 98 (1992) 1514–1523.
[9] R. Blaak, P.M.A. Sloot, Lattice dependence of reaction–diffusion in lattice Boltzmann modeling, Comput. Phys. Comm. 129 (2000) 256–266.
[10] R.M. Amorim, R.W. dos Santos, Solving the cardiac bidomain equations using graphics processing units, J. Comput. Sci. 4 (2013) 370–376.
[11] B.G. de Barros, R.S. Oliveira, W. Meira Jr., M. Lobosco, R.W. dos Santos, Simulations of complex and microscopic models of cardiac electrophysiology
powered by multi-GPU platforms, Comput. Math. Methods Med. (2012).
[12] E. Bartocci, E.M. Cherry, J. Glimm, R. Grosu, S.A. Smolka, F.H. Fenton, Toward real-time simulation of cardiac dynamics, in: CMSB11: Proceedings of
the 9th International Conference on Computational Methods in Systems Biology, 2011, pp. 103–112.
[13] B.M. Rocha, F.O. Campos, R.M. Amorim, G. Plank, R.W. dos Santos, M. Liebmann, G. Haase, Accelerating cardiac excitation spread simulations using
graphics processing units, Concurr. Comput.: Pract. Exper. 23 (2011) 708–720.
[14] W. Wang, L. Xu, J. Cavazos, H.H. Huang, M. Kay, Fast acceleration of 2D wave propagation simulations using modern computational accelerators, PLoS
One 9 (1) (2014) e86484.
[15] M. Schreiber, P. Neumann, S. Zimmer, H.-J. Bungartz, Free-surface lattice-Boltzmann simulation on many-core architectures, Procedia Comput. Sci. 4
(2011) 984–993.
[16] M. Geveler, D. Ribbrock, S. Mallach, D. Göddeke, A simulation suite for lattice-Boltzmann based real-time CFD applications exploiting multi-level
parallelism on modern multi- and many-core architectures, J. Comput. Sci. 2 (2011) 113–123.
[17] S.A. Niederer, E. Kerfoot, A.P. Benson, M.O. Bernabeu, O. Bernus, C. Bradley, E.M. Cherry, R. Clayton, F.H. Fenton, A. Garny, E. Heidenreich, S. Land,
M. Maleckar, P. Pathmanathan, G. Plank, J.F. Rodríguez, I. Roy, F.B. Sachse, G. Seemann, O. Skavhaug, N.P. Smith, Verification of cardiac tissue
electrophysiology simulators using an N-version benchmark, Philos. Trans. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 13 (2011) 4331–4351.
[18] J. Keener, J. Sneyd, Mathematical Physiology, Springer, 1998.
[19] C. Luo, Y. Rudy, A model of the ventricular cardiac action potential. depolarization, repolarization, and their interaction, Circ. Res. 68 (6) (1991)
1501–1526.
[20] K.H.W.J. ten Tusscher, A.V. Panfilov, Alternans and spiral breakup in a human ventricular tissue model, Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 291 (2006)
H1088–H1100.
[21] A. Mahajan, Y. Shiferaw, D. Sato, A. Baher, R. Olcese, L.-H. Xie, M.-J. Yang, P.-S. Chen, J.G. Restrepo, A. Karma, A. Garfinkel, Z. Qu, J.N. Weiss, A rabbit
ventricular action potential model replicating cardiac dynamics at rapid heart rates, Biophys. J. 94 (2008) 392–410.
[22] P.L. Bhatnagar, E.P. Gross, M. Krook, A model for collisional processes in gases I: small amplitude processes in charged and in neutral one-component
systems, Phys. Rev. 94 (1954) 511.
[23] H. Yoshida, M. Nagaoka, Multiple-relaxation-time lattice Boltzmann model for the convection and anisotropic diffusion equation, J. Comput. Phys.
229 (2010) 7774–7795.
[24] X. Zhang, A.G. Bengough, J.W. Crawford, I.M. Young, A lattice BGK model for advection and anisotropic dispersion equation, Adv. Water Resour. 25
(2002) 1–8.
[25] I. Ginzburg, Equilibrium-type and link-type lattice Boltzmann models for generic advection and anisotropic-dispersion equation, Adv. Water Resour.
(2005).
[26] S. Rush, H. Larsen, A practical algorithm for solving dynamic membrane equations, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 25 (1978) 389–392.
[27] J. Latt, How to implement your DdQq dynamics with only q variables per node (instead of 2q), Tech. Rep., Tufts University, 2007.
[28] K. Mattila, J. Hyvaluoma, T. Rossi, M. Aspnas, J. Westerholm, An efficient swap algorithm for the lattice Boltzmann method, Comput. Phys. Comm. 176
(2007) 200–210.
[29] M. Bernaschi, M. Fatica, S. Melchionna, S. Succi, E. Kaxiras, A flexible high-performance lattice Boltzmann GPU code for the simulations of fluid flows
in complex geometries, Concurr. Comput.: Pract. Exper. 22 (1) (2010) 1–14.
[30] F.J. Vetter, A.D. McCulloch, Three-dimensional analysis of regional cardiac function: a model of rabbit ventricular anatomy, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol.
69 (1998) 157–183.
[31] E. Vigmond, M.H.G. Plank, L. Leon, Computational tools for modeling electrical activity in cardiac tissue, J. Electrocardiol. 36 (2003) 69–74.
[32] G.R. Mirams, C.J. Arthurs, M.O. Bernabeu, R. Bordas, J. Cooper, A. Corrias, Y. Davit, S.-J. Dunn, A.G. Fletcher, D.G. Harvey, M.E. Marsh, J.M. Osborne, P.
Pathmanathan, J. Pitt-Francis, J. Southern, N. Zemzemi, D.J. Gavaghan, Chaste: an open source C++ library for computational physiology and biology,
PLoS Comput. Biol. (2013).
[33] S. Rapaka, T. Mansi, B. Georgescu, M. Pop, G.A. Wright, A. Kamen, D. Comaniciu, LBM-EP: lattice-Boltzmann method for fast cardiac electrophysiology
simulation from 3D images, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, MICCAI, 2012.

