LBM-EP: Lattice-Boltzmann Method
for Fast Cardiac Electrophysiology Simulation
from 3D Images
S. Rapaka1 , T. Mansi1 , B. Georgescu1, M. Pop2 , G.A. Wright2 ,
A. Kamen1 , and Dorin Comaniciu1
1

Siemens Corporation, Corporate Research and Technology,
Imaging and Computer Vision, Princeton, NJ, USA
2
Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto,
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Imaging Research, Toronto, ON, Canada

Abstract. Current treatments of heart rhythm troubles require careful
planning and guidance for optimal outcomes. Computational models of
cardiac electrophysiology are being proposed for therapy planning but
current approaches are either too simpliﬁed or too computationally intensive for patient-speciﬁc simulations in clinical practice. This paper
presents a novel approach, LBM-EP, to solve any type of mono-domain
cardiac electrophysiology models at near real-time that is especially tailored for patient-speciﬁc simulations. The domain is discretized on a
Cartesian grid with a level-set representation of patient’s heart geometry, previously estimated from images automatically. The cell model is
calculated node-wise, while the transmembrane potential is diﬀused using Lattice-Boltzmann method within the domain deﬁned by the levelset. Experiments on synthetic cases, on a data set from CESC’10 and on
one patient with myocardium scar showed that LBM-EP provides results
comparable to an FEM implementation, while being 10 − 45 times faster.
Fast, accurate, scalable and requiring no speciﬁc meshing, LBM-EP paves
the way to eﬃcient and detailed models of cardiac electrophysiology for
therapy planning.

1

Introduction

Since the seminal work of Hodgkin and Huxley [5], a large variety of models have
been proposed to simulate the propagation of the action potential (AP) across
the heart muscle, with various degrees of complexity ([3]). Biophysical models
aim to capture the ion interactions and protein mechanisms that regulate the AP.
At a higher scale, phenomenological models have been developed to mimic the
AP without directly considering the underlying molecular mechanisms. Finally,
Eikonal models do not simulate the AP altogether but the propagation of the
electrical front directly. Since these models are generative, they may constitute
eﬃcient tools for therapy planning. Phenomenological models provide a good
compromise between model details, being able to capture most of the pathological conditions, and complexity. Recent works demonstrated that those models
N. Ayache et al. (Eds.): MICCAI 2012, Part II, LNCS 7511, pp. 33–40, 2012.
c
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

34

S. Rapaka et al.

can be personalised from clinical data [1]. However, because they solve stiﬀ partial diﬀerential equations (PDE), they are still too computationally demanding
for day-to-day clinical setups and intervention guidance. Another limitation is
the requirement of high-quality/high-resolution volume meshes, which can be
diﬃcult to obtain from patient-speciﬁc anatomies.
In recent years, the lattice-Boltzmann method (LBM) [2] has developed as a
powerful technique for accurate simulation of a large class of partial-diﬀerential
equations. In particular, it has been successfully applied to pattern-forming
reaction-diﬀusion equations([4]). While originally developed from cellular automata models of ﬂuid ﬂows, the method has found a ﬁrm theoretical basis in
kinetic theory of weakly-compressible ﬂuid ﬂows. Some of the key strengths of
this method are, i) local nature of the computational algorithm, which provides
very high scalability on modern parallel computing architectures, ii) secondorder accuracy in space, and iii) simplicity of implementation on a uniform
Cartesian grid.
Motivated by the recent breakthrough in LBM, we present a novel framework,
henceforth called LBM-EP, for eﬃcient patient-speciﬁc simulations of cardiac
electrophysiology models at near real-time. Although general, the method is
illustrated in this study on the Mitchell-Schaeﬀer model [6]. Sec. 2 presents
a description of the algorithms used to process the medical images, and the
lattice-Boltzmann algorithm used for propagating the action-potential. Sec. 3
compares the simulation results computed with the proposed LBM-EP with
an FEM implementation of Mitchell-Schaeﬀer model in synthetic scenarios, a
dataset of CESC’10 Grand Challenge and one patient with a myocardium scar,
showing an accuracy in the range of the variability reported in the literature and
a speed-up of about 10 − 45× with respect to FEM. Sec. 4 concludes the paper.

2

Methods

2.1

Computational Domain Preparation from Medical Images

LBM-EP being solved on Cartesian grids (Sec. 2.3), its application to clinical
images is relatively immediate. Starting from a cardiac image (e.g. cine MRI),
the left endocardium, right endocardium and epicardium are automatically segmented using a machine learning approach [11] and fused in one surface representing the myocardium while preserving their anatomical label. A level-set
representation of that surface is then computed on an isotropic Cartesian grid.
Based on the labels, grid nodes lying at the heart endocardia are marked for
electrophysiology stimulation and synthetic ﬁbers are computed by linearly interpolating the elevation angle from −70◦ at the epicardium to +70◦ at the endocardium [3]. Scars can be reported in the domain through level set (Sec. 3.3).
2.2

Mitchell-Schaeﬀer Model of Action Potential

Mitchell-Schaeﬀer (M-S) model [6] is employed here although the method can
be extended to other mono-domain models. The model (Eq. (1)) relates the

Lattice-Boltzmann Method for Fast Cardiac Electrophysiology Simulation

35

normalized transmembrane AP v(t) ∈ [0, 1] to an inward gated current Jin =
hv 2 (1 − v)/τin , which captures the fast acting currents using the gating variable h(t), and an outward un-gated current Jout = −v/τout , which accounts for
transmembrane voltage decrease. A transient stimulus current Jstim is added to
the model to simulate electrical pacing.
∂v
= Jint + Jout + Jstim + c∇ · D∇v
∂t

(1)

1−h
The gating variable h(t) evolves according to dh
dt = τopen if v < vgate , otherwise
dh
−h
dt = τclose

where vgate is the change-over voltage, D = ρId + (1 − ρ)aa is the
anisotropic diﬀusion tensor along the ﬁber direction a with anisotropy ratio ρ, c
is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient along the ﬁbers. τin , τout , τopen and τclose are directly
related to the shape and duration of the AP ([6]), which makes their calibration
possible from clinical data.
2.3

Lattice-Boltzmann Model of Cardiac Electrophysiology

Eq. (1) is solved on the Cartesian grid (Sec. 2.1) using Lattice-Boltzmann method
with a 7-connectivity topology (6 connections + central position) and Neumann
boundary conditions. The gating variable h(t) is updated at every node of the
grid using a forward Euler scheme. The fundamental variable of LBM is the
vector of distribution functions f (x) = {fi (x)}i=1...7 , where fi (x) represents the
probability of ﬁnding a particle travelling along the edge ei of node x. The
governing equation at x for the edge ei is composed of two successive steps:
fi∗ = fi − Aij (fj − ωj v) + δtωi (Jin + Jout + Jstim ),

(2)

fi (x + ei , t + δt) = fi∗ (x, t)

(3)

where, the collision matrix A = (Aij )i,j∈1,7 relaxes the distribution function fi
towards the local value of the potential, v, fi∗ is an intermediate, post-collision
state of the distribution function, and ωi is a weighting factor that depends
on lattice connectivity, here ωi = 1/8 for the edges to the six neighbors and
position. The transmembrane AP is related to the fi ’s
ωi = 1/4 for the central

through v(x, t) = i fi (x, t). For each time step δt, a strictly local collision rule
(Eq. (2)) is applied to the distribution functions at each node. Post-collision, the
distribution functions stream along their corresponding edges to the neighboring
nodes (Eq. (3)). In its simplest form, the collision matrix is diagonal with a
characteristic relaxation time τ , A = (1/τ )I, where I is the 7 × 7 identity matrix.
At the problem boundaries, the streaming step requires the speciﬁcation of additional incoming distribution functions to ensure proper boundary conditions. It
can be shown thatthe potential gradient at a node is related to the fi ’s through
c∇v = (1 − 1/2τ ) i fi
ei [4]. The Neumann boundary condition for potential on
a surface simpliﬁes to i fi ei · n = 0. If the boundary is normal to any edge of
the lattice, the Neumann boundary condition is automatically recovered if the
incoming distribution at the node is equal to the outgoing one. Complex geometries can be handled easily by means of a level set formulation. The incoming

36

S. Rapaka et al.

distribution is calculated automatically from the distance to the wall at nodes
close to the boundary as provided by the level-set [10], thus enabling simulations
in complex domain without requiring advanced meshing algorithms.
Remarkably, this simple model can be shown to reproduce the reaction-diﬀusion
equation Eq. (1) with an isotropic diﬀusion coeﬃcient of c = (2τ − 1)/8 (see [4]
for the proof). To extend the model for anisotropic diﬀusion, like in the heart, the
matrix A is replaced by A = M−1 SM [9], where
⎛1 1 1 1 1 1 1 ⎞
⎛τ 0 0 0 0 0 0 ⎞
1 −1

⎜0 0
M = ⎝ 01 01
1
1

1
1

0
0
0
0
0
1 −1 0
0
0
0
0
1 −1 0
1
1
1
1 −6
−1 −1 0
0
0
1
1 −2 −2 0

1
0 τ11 τ12 τ13

0

0
0

5
0 τ6 0
0 0 τ7

0

0

⎟ −1 ⎜ 00 ττ21 ττ22 ττ23 00 00 00 ⎟
32 33
⎠ S = ⎝ 0 31
⎠
0
0
0 τ
0 0
0
0

0
0

0
0


The ﬁrst row of M corresponds to v = i fi , while rows 2 − 4 are the three
components of the potential gradient. The relaxation times (τij )i,j∈1,3 are related to the components of the diﬀusion tensor through τij = δij /2+4Dij δt/δx2 .
The relaxation times τ1 related to the potential and τ5 , τ6 and τ7 related to the
higher order moments do not directly eﬀect the diﬀusion solution, but eﬀect the
stability of the method. In this work, we use τ1 = 1 and τ5 = τ6 = τ7 = 1.33.
Algo. 1 summarizes the main steps of the method.
Algorithm 1. LBM-EP: Lattice-Boltzmann Model of Cardiac Electrophysiology
Require: Cartesian grid, level-set domain boundaries, δt, nbIter, model parameters
1: for iter = 1 → nbIter do
2:
t ← t + δt
3:
for every node x do
4:
∀i, compute post-collision distributions fi∗ (x) (Eq. 2)
5:
Update h(x)
6:
for every node x do
7:
∀i, stream
 fi (x) and apply boundary conditions (Eq. 3)
8: return v = i fi , h.

3

Experiments and Results

All experiments were executed on a standard Windows XP desktop machine (Intel Xeon, 2.40GHz octo-core, 4GB RAM). LBM-EP was implemented in Fortran
with no particular optimization. A semi-implicit, anisotropic ﬁnite element implementation of M-S model, called FEM-EP, was used for comparisons. FEM-EP
was based on linear tetrahedra and parallel optimization (OpenMP).
3.1

Quantitative Evaluation on Synthetic Scenarios

We ﬁrst compared the performance of LBM-EP with respect to FEM-EP in
two diﬀerent scenarios representing the main pathological features. To that end,
a 10 × 10 × 0.5 cm slab was discretized into 401 × 401 × 3 nodes (1,920,000
tetrahedra for FEM-EP). For both LBM-EP and FEM-EP, we used δt = 0.1ms,
τclose = 150 ms, τopen = 120 ms, τin = 0.3 ms, τout = 6 ms, vgate = 0.13,

Lattice-Boltzmann Method for Fast Cardiac Electrophysiology Simulation

37

c = 0.0003 cm2/ms and ρ = 1 (isotropic diﬀusion) [6]. An electrical stimulation
was applied at the nodes (x, y = 0, z) for 1 ms duration by setting v = 1 at
these nodes. Grid resolution analysis (not reported here) showed that numerical
convergence was reached for both models at that spatial and temporal resolution.
We ﬁrst tested the ability of LBM-EP to capture front-bending around a
scar. A scar region was simulated within the domain (Fig. 1, left panels) by:
setting the diﬀusion coeﬃcient c = 0 for FEM-EP, deﬁning Neumann boundary
conditions for LBM-EP. From the computed depolarization times (Fig. 1, left
panels), one can see that both models yielded very similar behavior. The AP
front calculated by LBM-EP correctly rotated around the scar. Where the front
was not perturbed by the scar, both models yielded nearly identical results,
as quantiﬁed by the AP at Point 2 (0.3 ms diﬀerence in depolarization time,
Fig. 1, right panel). Near the scar, slight diﬀerences could be identiﬁed, which
resulted in a diﬀerence of 9.7 ms in depolarization time at Point 1. However, this
cannot be interpreted as a limitation of LBM-EP, which captured perfectly the
Neumann boundary conditions around the scar, contrary to FEM-EP.
FEM EP

LBM EP

Action Potentials

Normalized Potential

1

0.8

LBM−EP, Pt1
FEM−EP, Pt1
LBM−EP, Pt2
FEM−EP, Pt2

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0.2

0.4

0.6

Time (in s)

0.8

1

Fig. 1. Left panels: Computed depolarization times (in ms) in a homogeneous medium
with scar (in black ). LBM-EP captured front rotation around the scar. Right panel : action potential at points 1 and 2, showing consistent results between both models.

We then tested the ability of LBM-EP to simulate vortex formation due to premature stimulation. For that, we set the diﬀusion coeﬃcient to 0.0012 cm2/ms,
removed the scar and applied a second stimulation at the nodes (x ≤ 0.5, y =
0.5, z) at t = 452 ms for both methods. As shown in Fig. 2, the patterns obtained
with LBM-EP were similar to those obtained with FEM-EP. LBM-EP could be
used to simulate complex pathologies like ﬁbrillation or tachycardia.
Computation Time. For all experiments, FEM-EP required ≈ 700 ms per
iteration whereas LBM-EP required only ≈ 80 ms, about 8.75× speed-up.
3.2

Comparison with Published Results on CESC’10 Data

We evaluated LBM-EP performance in a dataset distributed during CESC’10
MICCAI Grand Challenge with respect to FEM-EP and to a recently published
benchmark [1]. Our purpose being evaluation and not personalization, we did
not adjust the parameters locally. We thus compared our results with the generic
benchmark of the ionic ten Tusscher-Panﬁlov model only [1]. CESC’10 dataset

38

S. Rapaka et al.
LBM-EP

610 ms

FEM-EP

1320 ms

610 ms

1320 ms

Fig. 2. LBM-EP succesfully captured vortex formation due to premature stimulation

consisted in an explanted porcine heart, and comprised optical ﬂuorescence images of transmembrane potential and high-resolution diﬀusion-weighted (DW)
MRI images ([7]). The optical images contained the depolarization and repolarization phase of transmembrane potential under left endocardium and right
epicardium pacings at 1.1 Hz. Finally, the mesh constructed from DW-MRI had
the ﬁber directions integrated, providing a complete model of the heart anatomy.
LBM-EP was computed on 0.5 mm grid while FEM-EP was computed on
the provided tetrahedra mesh with 0.5 mm average edge-length. The time steps
were set to δtLBM−EP = 0.1 ms and δtF EM−EP = 0.5 ms. Myocardium ﬁbers
deﬁned on the tetrahedra mesh were rasterized on the LBM lattice for simulation. The generic M-S parameters were used for both models [6], with a diﬀusion
coeﬃcient c = 0.0035 cm2/ms and anisotropy ratio ρ = 0.25. As it can be seen
from Fig. 3, LBM-EP simulation was qualitatively similar to FEM-EP for both
pacing conditions in terms of depolarization isochrone patterns. The diﬀerence
in absolute depolarization time was mostly due to the diﬀerent computational
domain, in particular regarding the precise location of the excitation nodes and
the ﬁber orientation, which was locally altered by the rasterization. Compared
to the CESC’10 benchmark, LBM-EP provided similar depolarization patterns,
suggesting promising reproducibility and validity. Finally, while FEM-EP required ≈ 16 s per iteration, LBM-EP took only ≈ 0.35 s per iteration, which
corresponds to a speed-up of 45×. It should be noted that the computational
eﬃciency of our FEM implementation was similar to those reported in the literature, ≈ 1 s/iteration on the 1.5 mm mesh provided by the challengers as in [8].
3.3

Real Case Example

We ﬁnally illustrate how LBM-EP can be used in a real clinical scenario on a
patient with myocardium scar due to previous surgery. Parameters were kept
generic as no electrophysiology data were available. Fast conductivity was modeled on the endocardium to mimic the Purkinje ﬁbers. The scar was represented
as a level-set to ensure Neumann boundary conditions. Fig. 4 shows the depolarization time isochrones, illustrating some delays at the apex due to the scar.
Elsewhere in the myocardium the isochrones presented with patterns similar to
what has been reported in the literature [3]. For this patient, one time step was
calculated in 0.2 s for a grid size of 1 mm.

Lattice-Boltzmann Method for Fast Cardiac Electrophysiology Simulation

LBM-EP

CESC’10

Right Epicardium
Pacing

Left Endocardium
Pacing

FEM-EP

39

Fig. 3. FEM-EP and LBM-EP simulations using Mitchell-Schaeﬀer model and
CESC’10 data using ten Tusscher-Panﬁlov model (see text for details)

Fig. 4. LBM-EP simulation on one patient with myocardium scar

4

Conclusion and Future Work

We have presented in this paper, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst application of a near-real time lattice-Boltzmann model for general monodomain
models of cardiac electrophysiology. Node-based by construction, our framework
does not require advanced meshing and can be applied directly from images
by means of level-sets. Through comparisons with the traditional ﬁnite-element
method, we have empirically shown the applicability of LBM-EP to cardiac electrophysiology. A comprehensive description of the theory along with detailed
studies of convergence and accuracy are being prepared as a larger contribution.
LBM-EP provides second order accuracy in space, can be easily extended to any
type of mono-domain cellular model, and, above all, oﬀers between 10 − 45×
speed-up with respect to traditional FEM. Preliminary experiments on graphi-

40

S. Rapaka et al.

cal processing units (GPUs) showed the potential for another order-of-magnitude
improvement in computational speed. This is the ﬁrst time, to the best of our
knowledge, that very fast simulations of cardiac electrophysiology is achieved
with a detailed model. Our method may thus constitute an ideal framework for
patient-speciﬁc simulations for therapy planning and real-time guidance.
Acknowledgement. We would like to thank Prof. Oscar Camara of PhySense
group at Information and Communication Technologies Department (DTIC) at
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain for providing the CESC’10 benchmark results.

References
1. Camara, O., Sermesant, M., Lamata, P., Wang, L., Pop, M., Relan, J., De Craene,
M., Delingette, H., Liu, H., Niederer, S., Pashaei, A., Plank, G., Romero, D.,
Sebastian, R., Wong, K.C., Zhang, H., Ayache, N., Frangi, A., Shi, P., Smith,
N., Wright, G.: Inter-Model Consistency and Complementarity: Learning from exvivo Imaging and Electrophysiological Data towards an Integrated Understanding
of Cardiac Physiology. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 107, 122–133 (2011)
2. Chen, S., Doolen, G.D.: Lattice Boltzmann method for ﬂuid ﬂows. Annu. Rev.
Fluid Mech. 30(1), 329–364 (1998)
3. Clayton, R.H., Bernus, O., Cherry, E.M., Dierckx, H., Fenton, F.H., Mirabella, L.,
Panﬁlov, A.V., Sachse, F.B., Seemann, G., Zhang, H.: Models of cardiac tissue
electrophysiology: Progress, challenges and open questions. Prog. Biophys. Mol.
Biol. 104(1-3), 22 (2011)
4. Dawson, S.P., Chen, S., Doolen, G.D.: Lattice Boltzmann computations for
reaction-diﬀusion equations. J. Chem. Phys. 98(2), 1514–1523 (1993)
5. Hodgkin, A.L., Huxley, A.F.: A quantitative description of ion currents and its
applications to conduction and excitation in nerve membranes. J. Physiol. 117(4),
500–544 (1952)
6. Mitchell, C.C., Schaeﬀer, D.G.: A two-current model for the dynamics of cardiac
membrane. Bull. Math. Biol. 65(5), 767–793 (2003)
7. Pop, M., Sermesant, M., Lepiller, D., Truong, M.V., McVeigh, E.R., Crystal, E.,
Dick, A., Delingette, H., Ayache, N., Wright, G.A.: Fusion of optical imaging and
mri for the evaluation and adjustment of macroscopic models of cardiac electrophysiology: A feasibility study. Med. Image Anal. 13(2), 370–380 (2009)
8. Relan, J., Sermesant, M., Pop, M., Delingette, H., Sorine, M., Wright, G., Ayache,
N.: Volumetric Prediction of Cardiac Electrophysiology using a Heart Model Personalised to Surface Data. In: CI2BM 2009 - MICCAI Workshop on Cardiovascular
Interventional Imaging and Biophysical Modelling (2009)
9. Yoshida, H., Nagaoka, M.: Multiple-relaxation-time lattice Boltzmann model for
the convection and anisotropic diﬀusion equation. J. Comp. Phys. 229, 7774–7795
(2010)
10. Yu, D., Mei, R., Luo, L., Shyy, W.: Viscous ﬂow computations with the method of
lattice Boltzmann equation. Prog. Aero. Sci. 39(5), 329–367 (2003)
11. Zheng, Y., Barbu, A., Georgescu, B., Scheuering, M., Comaniciu, D.: Four-chamber
heart modeling and automatic segmentation for 3-D cardiac CT volumes using
marginal space learning and steerable features. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 27(11),
1668–1681 (2008)

